# GenderPayGap-over-the-years-DataAnalysis
Gender Pay Gap and Educational importance analysis using General Social Survey data for the years 1974 and 2018

A person’s income is not just impacted by personal criteria like education level and age but also social criteria like gender and occupational prestige score. Gender pay inequality remains a persistent issue globally, transcending geographical boundaries and socioeconomic strata. In this project, we delve into the intricate dynamics of the gender pay gap using empirical evidence drawn from the General Social Survey (GSS) spanning from 1974 to 2018. We would also like to understand how education level affects an individual’s salary and the occupation prestige score to examine if higher education improves a person’s income and how this trend varies across different occupations.

### Data preparation:

The original dataset contains 61697 entries collected over a period of 1974 to 2018. By constraining on the year, we reduce and split the dataset by selecting only the data from 1974 and 2018. The data was cleaned by removing the tuples with null values. Entries only with Full-time employment status were selected to give a common ground on hours of work for better analysis. After initial data cleaning, we got 522 entries for the 1974 dataset (348 males and 173 females) and 977 entries for the 2018 dataset (507 males and 469 females)

### Results and Discussion

By doing regression analysis on the datasets, after understanding the causal relationship among them, we were able to draw the following conclusions as solutions to the research questions that we started with:
1. **Gender-Pay gap:** Comparing 1974 and 2018 income results we see that the gender gap has gone down significantly and the effect of gender appears to have reversed from a positive to a negative association with income. Though this may not be true in all occupations, this certainly seems to be the case with the considered dataset. This can be attributed to the societal improvements in terms of gender equality and the changes in the occupational distribution of men and women that happened during the time period considered.
2. **Impact of education on different occupations:** The broader pattern observed in the data is that higher education levels tend to correlate with higher incomes across various occupations. Comparing the trends in 2018 to the trend in 1974, it's likely that the influence of education on income has become more pronounced over time, reflecting the increasing importance of education in accessing higher-paying jobs in modern economies.
3. **Impact of education on the relationship between prestige score and income:** In 1974, the effect of prestige score on real income is moderated or influenced by education level. In contrast, in 2018, education’s influence on this relationship didn’t seem to be statistically significant. Even though the conclusions drawn from the available datasets show an improvement in problems like gender gap and education-pay gaps over time, we also need to take into consideration that the datasets from 1974 and 2018 are not equally distributed among different genders and different education levels. As a part of future work, some more analysis can be done on these datasets like how having kids impacts a woman’s income and how marital status influences how much one earns
